Prime Minister's Office

English rendering of Prime Minister addressing the 18th
Lok Sabha after election of the Speaker of the house
Posted On: 26 JUN 2024 1:15PM by PIB Delhi

Hon’ble Mr. Speaker Sir,
It is the privilege of this House that you are presiding over this chair for the second time. I extend my heartfelt
congratulations to you and the entire House.
Hon’ble Mr. Speaker Sir,
I offer my best wishes to you as well as on behalf of the entire House. In this significant phase of the Amrit Kaal, being
appointed to this position for the second time is a great responsibility. Your five years of experience, combined with our
collective five years of experience, gives us confidence that you will guide us all in the coming five years and play a
crucial role in fulfilling the hopes and expectations of the nation in this House.
Hon’ble Mr. Speaker Sir,
Our scriptures state that a humble and tactful person naturally succeeds. Along with these qualities, you possess a sweet
smile that keeps the entire House happy. You have always set new standards and created new records at every step.
Taking on the role of Speaker for the second time in the 18th Lok Sabha is, in itself, a new record. Shri Balram Jakhar ji
was the first Speaker to complete a five-year term and then get the opportunity to become Speaker again. After him, you
are the one who has been given the opportunity to become Speaker again after completing five years. For the past 20
years, most Speakers either did not contest elections (after their first term) afterward or did not win (in the second term).
This shows how challenging the Speaker's role is, making it difficult to win again. However, you have created a new
history by winning again.
Hon’ble Mr. Speaker Sir,
Most of our Hon’ble MPs in this House are familiar with you and your life. Last time, I spoke extensively about you in
this House, and I do not wish to repeat those things today. However, as a fellow MP, I want to highlight that your work
as an MP is worthy of recognition and learning. I am confident that your working style as an MP will inspire our firsttimer and young MPs. The campaign you have run in your parliamentary constituency for the health of mothers and
children, giving priority to the campaign for a ‘Suposhit Maa’ (healthy mother) is truly inspiring. You have chosen to
serve humanity by providing health services to the people in rural areas of Kota with ‘Hospital on Wheels,’ a
commendable initiative beyond political work. It is also helping in providing health services to the people in every
village. Regularly, you distribute clothes, blankets, umbrellas as per the season, and shoes to the underprivileged. You
have prioritized encouraging sports for the youth in your constituency.
Under your leadership, the 17th Lok Sabha experienced a golden period in parliamentary history. Historic decisions and
significant reforms made in the House under your chairmanship are the legacy of the House as well as yours. When there
will be an analysis about the 17th Lok Sabha in the future, then the 17th Lok Sabha under your chairmanship will have a
very big role in giving a new direction to the future of Bharat.
Hon’ble Mr. Speaker Sir,

Under your leadership, the House passed important and historic laws such as the Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam 2023,
Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization Bill, Indian Penal Code, Indian Evidence Act, Indian Citizen Protection Code,
Social Security Code, Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, Muslim Women Marriage Rights Protection Bill,
Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Bill, Consumer Protection Bill, Direct Tax, and the Vivad se Vishwas Bill,
among others. These achievements have created a strong foundation for the country. Under your chairmanship, this
House accomplished the work which was not done in 70 years of independence.
Hon’ble Mr. Speaker Sir,
In the long journey of democracy, there are many milestones. Some occasions give us the opportunity to set new records.
The achievements of the 17th Lok Sabha will be a source of pride for the country both today and in the future. As the
country strives to fulfil its aspirations and modernize Bharat, the new Parliament building will play a role in shaping the
future of Amrit Kaal under your leadership. Our entry into the new Parliament building was under your leadership, and
you have made significant decisions to make parliamentary procedures effective and responsible, strengthening
democracy. Today, we work in a paperless digital system in the Lok Sabha. For the first time, you established a system to
provide briefings for all Hon’ble MPs, ensuring they had the necessary reference material, which made the discussions
in the House more substantial. This was a very good initiative which instilled confidence in MPs, making them feel they
could contribute and present their arguments. You have developed a good system.
Hon’ble Mr. Speaker Sir,
The success of G20 is a significant chapter for Bharat. However, what has not been discussed much is the P20, where
you led the summit of presiding officers and speakers of G20 countries. This summit, with the highest number of
participating countries, took place under your leadership, resulting in excellent decisions and played a vital role in
enhancing Bharat’s democratic prestige globally.
Hon’ble Mr. Speaker Sir,
This building is not just four walls. Our Parliament is the centre of hope for 140 crore citizens. The proceedings,
accountability, and conduct in Parliament strengthen the faith of our citizens in democracy. Under your guidance, the
productivity of the 17th Lok Sabha reached 97%, the highest in 25 years, and for this, all Hon’ble members deserve
congratulations, but you especially deserve recognition. During the challenging period of Corona, you personally called
each MP to check on their well-being. Whenever there was news of an MP's illness, you personally showed concern as
the head of the House. This personal care made me proud, hearing from MPs from all parties about how you acted as the
head of the family during that period of Corona. Despite the difficult times, you ensured that the work of the House did
not stop during the period of Corona. MPs respected every suggestion of yours, whether it was about seating
arrangements or other measures, and continued working for the country. The decisions you made allowed us to continue
functioning even during the challenging times of Corona, achieving 170% productivity, which is significant news
worldwide.
Hon’ble Mr. Speaker Sir,
We all wish to maintain the conduct and rules of the House, and you have made precise, balanced, and sometimes stern
decisions. I know such decisions can be painful to you, but you have always prioritized the dignity of the House over
personal pain, striving to uphold parliamentary traditions. For this courageous work, Hon’ble Mr. Speaker Sir, you
deserve special recognition. Hon’ble Mr. Speaker Sir, I have full faith that you will be successful, but the 18th Lok
Sabha under your leadership will successfully fulfil the dreams of the country's citizens.
Once again, I extend my heartfelt congratulations to you on this significant responsibility and wish you all the best in
leading this House to new heights of development for the country.
Many congratulations to you!

DISCLAIMER: This is the approximate translation of PM’s speech. Original speech was delivered in Hindi.

***

DS/VJ/VK/AK
(Release ID: 2028730) Visitor Counter : 1763

Read this release in: Marathi , Urdu , Hindi , Hindi_MP , Assamese , Manipuri , Punjabi , Gujarati , Tamil , Telugu , Malayalam

